
Today at work I overheard some of the IT folks talking about file monitors for various systems and remembered that I had written one of these a few years ago …so here it is!

<div></div><div>This app will run through a list of directories and email you a report of which files have been added or updated. I use it on my web server so that I can keep an eye on malicious files that someone may have uploaded (although that has never happened).</div><div></div><div>In the config file there are a number of settings you need to update with your SMTP credentials. There is also a template.csrzr file which is the template for the email that is sent. It is C# with Razor syntax that generates HTML for the email content. If you feel comfortable with editing that go at it.</div><div></div><div>There is also a -test.cmd file that will run the application with the -test parameter. The only thing this does different is that it doesn’t update the LastRunTime setting in the config file once it’s finished.</div><div></div><div>I have this setup on my server to run once a day using Windows Task Scheduler but you can run it as often or as little as you like using the same method.</div><div></div><div>Here is a list of all the settings in the config file. The download is below.</div><div></div><div></div><table class="table table-bordered table-condensed table-hover table-striped table-dark"><thead><tr><th>Setting Name</th><th>Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>Paths</td><td>A | (pipe) seperated list of paths to be monitored.</td></tr><tr><td>LastRunTime</td><td>The value is used to determine when the last time the program was run and as the time to compare new/updated files to. After sending a report the program will update this value. You do not need to change this value.</td></tr><tr><td>InstanceName</td><td>The instance name to be used in the reporting template. If the instance name is blank then the name given to the machine will be used.</td></tr><tr><td>FromAddress</td><td>Email address the report will come from.</td></tr><tr><td>Subject</td><td>Subject of the email. Replaces {0} with the InstanceName. For example if the InstanceName is “WEB01” and the Subject is “File Report for {0}” then the subject of the email will be “File Report for WEB01”.</td></tr><tr><td>ToAddresses</td><td>A , (comma) seperated list of email addresses the report will be sent to.</td></tr><tr><td>SmtpHost</td><td>The SMTP host address.</td></tr><tr><td>SmtpSsl</td><td>“true” or “false” value that will determine if the email is sent using SSL.</td></tr><tr><td>SmtpPort</td><td>The SMTP port number.</td></tr><tr><td>SmtpTimeout</td><td>The number of milliseconds to wait for the email to be sent before timing out.</td></tr><tr><td>SmtpUser</td><td>The SMTP user name.</td></tr><tr><td>SmtpPass</td><td>The SMTP password.</td></tr></tbody></table>[sdm_download id=”4551″ fancy=”0″] * 92KB


